# Coursework 1 2021/22

*This coursework formed part of the assessment of this module that students took in 2021/22. You may wish to use it to help in your revision for the final exam.*

*Support is provided through the MS Class Team. [Solutions are available for checking answers](./solutions01.md).*

This coursework is worth 20% of the credit of the module.

## Part 1: Short answer questions (12 marks)

1.  **Finite precision number systems** Consider system given by $(\beta, t, L, U) = (10, 4, -1, 3)$.

    a.  What is the machine precision, $eps$, of this system? **\[ 1 mark \]**

       -   $0.05$
       -   $0.005$
       -   $0.0005$
       -   $0.00005$

    b.  Which of the following is the closest representation of $1/3$ in this system written in normalised floating point representation? **\[ 1 mark \]**

       -   $0.333 \times 10^{0}$
       -   $0.3333 \times 10^{0}$
       -   $3.333 \times 10^{-1}$
       -   $3.3333 \times 10^{-1}$

    c.  Let $x=800$. For which of the following is $fl(x + y) = fl(x)$. Select all that apply. **\[ 3 marks \]**

       -   $y = 0.4000 \times 10^{-1}$

       -   $y = 0.4000 \times 10^{0}$

       -   $y = 0.4000 \times 10^{1}$

2.  **Matrices and vectors** Let

    $$
    A = \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 4 \\ 4 & 5 \end{pmatrix},
    B = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 2 \\ 1 & 3 \\ 9 & 8 \end{pmatrix},
    C = \begin{pmatrix} 3 \\ -1 \end{pmatrix},
    D = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 2 \end{pmatrix}.
    $$

    Evaluate these expressions (if possible) **\[ 1 mark each \]**

    a.  $B A$;

       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 8 & 14 & 50 \\ 10 & 19 & 76 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 8 & 10 \\ 14 & 19 \\ 50 & 76 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 0 & 8 \\ 4 & 15 \\ 9 & 8 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   not possible

    b.  $A^T A + C D$;

       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 4 & 16 \\ 16 & 25 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 23 & 27 \\ 34 & 39 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 23 & 34 \\ 27 & 39 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   not possible

    c.  $B B^T + (C D)^T$.

       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 7 & 5 & 16 \\ 12 & 8 & 33 \\ 16 & 33 & 145 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 4 & 6 & 16 \\ 6 & 10 & 33 \\ 16 & 33 & 145 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   $\begin{pmatrix} 7 & 12 & 16 \\ 5 & 8 & 33 \\ 16 & 33 & 145 \end{pmatrix}$
       -   not possible

3.  **Matrices and vectors** Consider the four matrices

    $$
    A = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 3 \\ 0 & 2 \\ 1 & -3 \\ -2 & 8 \end{pmatrix},
    B = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & -1 \end{pmatrix},
    C = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ -1 \\ -3 \end{pmatrix},
    D = \begin{pmatrix} 9 & 11 & 17 & 13 \end{pmatrix}.
    $$

	Of the sixteen possible products only four give a well defined matrix product. State which four. **\[ 4 marks \]**

## Part 2: Free answer questions (8 marks)

Please upload a single file containing the answers to all parts of question 4. Code and tables should be included in-line. You should clearly label each part of your answer.

4.  Archimedes approximated $\pi$ by determining lengths of the perimeters of polygons inscribing and circumscribing a circle of diameter 1. Starting with the hexagon and successively doubling the number of sides, we have the recurrence formula for the side length in the circumscribed polygon, at step $n+1$,

     $$
        \begin{aligned}
        p_{n+1} & = \frac{ \sqrt{p_n^2+1} - 1 }{ p_n } && \mbox{ for } n=0,1,2,\ldots
		&& (1) \\
     p_0 & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}.
     \end{aligned}
    $$

	Thus $\pi$ can be found as a limit, noticing that the number of sides is $6 \cdot 2^n$,

	$$
      \pi = \lim_{n \to \infty} 6 \cdot 2^n \cdot p_n = 3.141592653589793\ldots
    $$

    We can use this iteration to write code to compute $\pi$ using:

    ``` python
    import numpy as np


    def side_length(n):
        """
        Compute the length of one side of a polygon with 6*2**n sides.

        ARGUMENTS:  n  positive integer to calculate number of sides.

        RETURNS:    float
        """
        assert n >= 0

        if n == 0:
            return 1.0 / np.sqrt(3.0)

        p = side_length(n - 1)
        return (np.sqrt(p * p + 1.0) - 1.0) / p


    def pi_approx(n):
        """
        Compute an approximation to pi using polygonal approxmations of
        a circle.

        ARGUMENTS:  n postive integer

        RETURNS:    float approximation of pi
        """
        return 6.0 * 2 ** n * side_length(n)
    ```

    a.  Produce a table of values of `n`, `pi_approx(n)` and the error between $\pi$ and its approximation for `n` between 0 and 50 inclusive (any format is fine). What is the maximum number of correct digits you found? **\[1 mark\]**

    b.  Iterating further after the best approximation, what would you see? Why? **\[ 2 marks \]**

    c.  Find iteration steps at which the formula eq. (1) cannot be trusted. **\[1 marks \]**

    d.  Rewrite eq. (1), in order to improve the accuracy. Implement this new formula in python. Produce a table of values of `n`, `pi_approx(n)` and the error between $\pi$ and its approximation for `n` between 0 and 50 inclusive (any format is fine). Please submit your code and the error table. **\[ 2 marks \]**

    e.  Compute $\pi$ again using the formula obtained in part d. How many correct digits can you achieve now? If you make more and more iterations after the best approximation, comment on what you observe by considering each term in your iteration formula. **\[ 2 marks \]**
